---
layout: archive
title: "Research Section"
permalink: /portfolio/
author_profile: true
---

##PhD project description: 

My PhD project in the lab of Bernd Bukau under the supervision and guidance of Günter Kramer, was focused on a fundamental research question: How do proteins find each other in a crowded environment like a human cell. We speculated that many protein complexes form already while they are being synthesized by the ribosome.  The first indication of co-translational protein assembly was already described in 1963, for a homo-tetrameric protein complex of beta-galactosidase in E. coli (Zipser 1963). Zipser could detect beta-galactosidase activity in the polysome fraction isolated via sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation. This result suggests on of two possible assembly mechanism. (i) Three fully translated monomers form a functional tetramer with a nascent subunit, this is a mode of assembly that I refer to as “co-post assembly”. (ii) The entire assembly process of the tetramer involves multiple or exclusively nascent chains that form a preliminary tetramer, this mode of assembly was named by us as “co-co assembly“ (Fig. 1). 

Since this first indication, the list of complexes that are described to assemble co-translationally has steadily increased, for co-post as well as co-co assembly (ref). Several experimental approaches could show that co-translational assembly is not a phenomenon of individual protein complexes but a prevalent mechanism occurring in all kingdoms of live (Ducan and Marta 2011, Shieh et al. 2015, Shiber et al. 2018, Bertolini et al. 2021). But it was never shown or measured on the entire proteome how many subunits really employ such co-translational assembly mechanisms. 
The idea of randomly colliding subunits in a crowded cytoplasm based on diffusion to coordinate all different assembly processes seems not efficient enough nor functional. In layman's terms you could ask yourself: How would you try to find your partner at a concert with a million fans standing densely packed and jumping around in front of you? You could start to mix yourself into the crowd and randomly search for your partner, but I think everyone will agree that this strategy is a tedious and non-efficient way that will take plenty of time. This concert analogy describes the state of any cell in your body. However it would be possible. The diffusion coefficient of a freely moving monomer can be assumed to be around 30 µm2/s in the eukaryotic cytosol (Elowitz et al. 1997). If we take a standard human cell, which can be estimated to have a diameter of 40 µm with a volume of 2000 µm3 (Bohil et al. 2006), it would mean that a single monomer will require several seconds to diffuse throughout the entire cell, which seems in a first approximation fast enough. However, random collision of such orphan subunits with another protein would often not end without consequences. The collision could lead to an interaction of two similar but different orphan subunits, which were not meant to form a complex and would create a promiscuous complex.  In addition, even if two proteins that are meant to form a complex collide by random diffusion, it is not guaranteed that the two dimerization domains are oriented in the same way to grant productive assembly. To add some numbers to the concert analogy: if all assemblies would be based on random collision a total of 550 million orphan subunits would have to find a partner within a cell during cell growth (for mammalian cells it is assumed that around 108 proteins are present (Christopher et al. 2007), of which approximately 55% form oligomers (Lynch et al. 2012)). Considering that the employed protein oligomerization domains are limited and in mammalian cells often redundant, it is hard to imagine that the assembly of all these oligomers occurs exclusively based on random diffusion. 

So back to the concert analogy! How can you find your partner in such a crowded environment? The simplest and almost trivial solution to this problem is that you show up to the concert already together with your partner, best hand in hand and stick together throughout the concert, so you never have to actually search for each other. This is what we found happens for many proteins inside cells too: they assemble with their correct partner from the very beginning on, while they are both being produced by ribosomes. So, our concert analogy and the idea to meet before you enter the concert hall describes the major advantage of early interactions between proteins: it allows any protein to find their partner quickly and efficiently before they leave the ribosome and enter the crowded environment. This simple trick is relevant in all living cells, because each cell has many highly similar variants of almost identical proteins. In many cases it is really crucial that certain proteins form a functional pair with the correct protein variant within a relatively short time, otherwise mispairing can lead to malfunction of entire biological systems. 
The ruling dogma was that proteins are born throughout a defined sequence of events. This linear process starts with the genetic information stored in form of DNA that is copied into messenger RNAs and each mRNA is then used as a template by ribosomes to translate the linear nucleic-acid sequence into a chain of amino acids. These newly produced nascent protein chains have then to fold into a unique three-dimensional structure. The final maturation step of most proteins is then to assemble into protein-complexes, because proteins do usually not work alone in isolation but need their specific protein partners to gain their biological function. 

##Postdoc project description: 

My postdoc project in the lab of Lars Steinmetz, focuses on the pathophysiology of dilated cardiomyopathy by coupling single DNA mutations to the molecular mechanisms that drive the disease phenotypes. The simple question is: Can we assess the pathophysiology of all possible missense mutations in a single gene via high throughput screening in a pooled manner. And is it possible that different mutations in the same gene can lead to different gain-of-functions or loss-of-function phenotypes, which leads to the same disease phenotype.  
The idea was to employ deep saturation muatgensis to generate single iPSC cells each with a single RBM20 mutatuion and employ the cell pool for different single cell phenyotypig approaches. The first read out was to screen for all mutations that lead to mislocalization of our target protein via image enabled cell sorting. Such a screen allows us to assigne each mutant that will follow the same phatophysiology as already described pathogenic mutanst and will reduce the amount of variants of uncertaincy. Such an atlas for a single protein is of high value for clinicants, to dissect the genetic and environmental interactions that underlie complex disease phenotypes. The long term goal is to predict phenotypic traits from genetic infromation. 
